---
title: 'Understanding Depthwise Separable Convolutions'
date: 2023-06-24
permalink: /posts/20230624-separable-convs-notes/

---
Depthwise separable convolutions, also known as separable convolutions, are an innovative method to minimize the computational cost and the number of parameters involved in a convolution operation. This feature leads to more efficient convolutional neural network (CNN) layers and in some scenarios, even better performance.

## **Traditional Convolution vs Separable Convolution**

In a traditional convolution, each output neuron stores $cinkk$ parameters. Therefore, for an output consisting of $cout$  filters, the total number of learnable parameters amounts to $coutcinkk.$

Separable convolutions implement an ingenious trick to reduce the number of parameters significantly:

1. **Depthwise convolution:** In this step, independent convolution operations are performed on each input channel, i.e., **`Conv2D(in_channels=in_channels, out_channels=in_channels,kernel=kernel (e.g.3), groups=in_channels)`**. This step focuses on finding spatial relationships within the input, while channels remain independent and don't communicate with each other.
2. **Pointwise convolution:** In this step, the channels start communicating with each other. This operation aims to find relationships across the channels. Essentially, it involves a linear operation (fully connected layer) where each neuron in the layer is connected to all neurons in the previous layer.

Let's consider an example where **`in_channels=3`**, **`out_channels=32`**, and kernel size **`k=3`**:

In the case of separable convolutions, the total parameters calculated are:
**`params_Separable = in_channels*k*k + out_channels*1*1*in_channels = 123`**

For traditional convolutions, the parameters would be:
**`params_normal_conv = in_channels*out_channels*k*k = 864`**

## **Efficiency and Performance**

As the comparison above illustrates, separable convolutions drastically reduce the number of parameters required. This reduction enables the creation of more complex or deeper models without a proportional increase in computation or memory usage, which is particularly useful when deploying models on resource-constrained devices like mobile phones.

The natural question arises - are separable convolutions only more efficient, or do they also perform better? The answer is nuanced. The performance of depthwise separable convolutions is heavily task and data-dependent. In some scenarios, they may even lead to similar or superior performance compared to standard convolutions, as seen in models like MobileNet and Xception.

However, the key trade-off lies in computational efficiency and **representational power**. Standard convolutions offer greater representational power as each filter can interact with all input channels (3D relationships), thereby allowing for more complex feature learning. On the other hand, depthwise separable convolutions split this process into two steps, potentially limiting their expressiveness.